# (Under Construction) Cloud Layer

This repository corresponds to the cloud layer and is used to deploy projects. This layer is responsible to deploy a specific project, using the [Cloud Input Vars](#cloud-input-vars) as the input values that contain the data needed to [deploy the project](#deploying-a-project).

_It's recommended to use a controller layer, like defined at http://github.com/lucasbasquerotto/ctl, to manage projects and generate those variables, instead of using this layer to deploy a project directly._

## Demo

Before start using this layer, it's easier to see it in action. Below is a simple demo used to deploy a project. The demo uses pre-defined [input variables](#cloud-input-vars), and then execute this layer to deploy a project.

To execute the demo you will need a container engine (like `docker` or `podman`).

1. Create an empty directory somewhere in your filesystem, let's say, `/var/demo`.

2. Create 2 directories in it: `env` and `data` (the names could be different, just remember to use these directories when mapping volumes to the container).

3. Create a `demo.yml` file inside `env` with the data needed to deploy the project:

```yaml
# Enter the data here (see the demo examples)
```

4. Deploy the project:

```shell
docker run -it --rm -v /var/demo/env:/env -v /var/demo/data:/lrd local/demo
```

**The above commands in a shell script:**

```shell
mkdir -p /var/demo/env /var/demo/data

cat <<'SHELL' > /var/demo/env/demo.yml
# Enter the data here (see the demo examples)
SHELL

docker run -it --rm -v /var/demo/env:/env -v /var/demo/data:/lrd local/demo
```

**That's it. The project was deployed.**

🚀 You can see examples of project deployment demos [here](#).

The demos are great for what they are meant to be: demos, prototypes. **They shouldn't be used for development** (bad DX if you need real time changes without having to push and pull newer versions of repositories, furthermore you are unable to clone repositories in specific locations defined by you in the project folder). **They also shouldn't be used in production environments** due to bad security (the vault value used for decryption is `123456`, and changes to the [project environment repository](#project-environment-repository) may be lost if you forget to push them).

# Deploying a Project

The deployment of a project in this layer is done, by default, in 3 steps.

1. [Cloud Preparation Step](#cloud-preparation-step)

2. [Cloud Context Preparation Step](#cloud-context-preparation-step)

## Project Base Directory

The project base directory is the directory (`project_base_dir`) in which the files generated by the project deployment and used to deploy the project are located.

When running with the `dev` [input variable](#cloud-input-vars), there should be a relative symlink `project_base_dir/dev/link` that points to a folder that will be the base of the paths (`base_path`) used to map repositories (so that you can share repositories across projects).

When running this step in a container, `<project_base_dir>/dev` should map to `<base_path>` in the host, and a symlink `<base_path>/link` should be created pointing to itself (`.`) so that the relative symlinks work inside and outside the container.

_If using the controller layer at http://github.com/lucasbasquerotto/ctl to deploy the project, the project base directory will be at `<root_dir>/projects/<project_name>/` and the symlinks and volume mappings will be already handled._

## Cloud Input Vars

The [Cloud Preparation Step](#cloud-preparation-step) needs a file in the following format located at `<project_base_dir>/files/ctl/vars.yml` to deploy a project:

```yaml
ctxs:
- ctx1
- ctx2
dev: true
env_file: path/to/env.yml
env_params:
    param1: value1
    param2: value2
init:
    container: lucasbasquerotto/cloud:1.3.6
    container_type: docker
    root: true
    run_file: /usr/local/bin/run
key: project-key
migration: ''
path_params:
    path_env: repos/env
    path_env_base: repos/env-base
    path_map_repos:
        app: repos/app
        cloud: repos/cloud
        custom_cloud: repos/custom-cloud
        custom_pod: repos/custom-pod
        env_base: repos/env-base
        pod: repos/pod
project_dir_rel: projects/project-key
repo:
    src: ssh://git@github.com/lucasbasquerotto/project-env-demo.git
    ssh_file: ssh.key
    version: master
repo_vault:
    file: vault
    force: true
root_dir: <root_dir>
```

## Cloud Preparation Step

This step receives a `project-dir` parameter with the [project base directory](#project-base-directory), then use the [Cloud Input Vars](#cloud-input-vars) at `<project_base_dir>/files/ctl/vars.yml` to clone the [project environment repository](#project-environment-repository), load the [`env_file`](#project-environment-file) defined in the input vars, load the [project base environment repository](#project-environment-repository) if defined in the [`env_file`](#project-environment-file), in which case it loads the [`env_base_file`](#project-environment-base-file) passing the variables at the `env_file` as parameters, and, finally, for each context defined in the input vars (`ctxs`), clone the cloud repository for that context.

This preparation step is commonly executted inside a container, runs only once for the project and is the same even if the cloud repositories for the contexts are different, so it's expected that all the contexts in a project are compatible with this preparation step, and any specific stuff related to the context is run in the [Cloud Context Preparation Step](#cloud-context-preparation-step).

To clone/pull the [project environment repository](#project-environment-repository), the `repo.src` and `repo.version` are used. If `repo.ssh_file` is specified, the ssh file defined at `<project_base_dir>/secrets/ctl/` is used.

When loading the environment variables defined in the [`env_file`](#project-environment-file), if `repo_vault.file` is defined, the vault file there is used to decrypt the encrypted values. The [`env_file`](#project-environment-file) can access use jinja2 expressions and has access to the following variables:

- `project_name` (`string`): the project name, the value of `key` in the [Cloud Input Vars](#cloud-input-vars).
- `project_ctxs` (`list` of `string`): the contexts that will run in the project, the value of `ctxs` in the [Cloud Input Vars](#cloud-input-vars). The value `ctxs` is optional in the [Cloud Input Vars](#cloud-input-vars), and if not defined there, should be defined in the `env_file` (or `env_base_file`)
- `params` (`dict`): any parameters defined at `env_params` in the [Cloud Input Vars](#cloud-input-vars).

Aside from `project-dir`, the file that [runs this preparation step](container/run.sh) also accepts the following options:

| Option        | Description |
| ------------- | ----------- |
| <nobr>`-f`</nobr><br><nobr>`--fast`</nobr> | Skips the [Cloud Preparation Step](#cloud-preparation-step) and [Cloud Context Preparation Step](#cloud-context-preparation-step). |
| <nobr>`-p`</nobr><br><nobr>`--prepare`</nobr> | Only runs the [Cloud Preparation Step](#cloud-preparation-step) and [Cloud Context Preparation Step](#cloud-context-preparation-step).<br><br>This has a particular feature that allows to pass arguments to each step that will handle it (as long as subsequent layers handle it). For example, passing the args `-vv` would generally be used only by the last step, but in this case it will be used as args to run the [Cloud Preparation Step](#cloud-preparation-step) and no args to subsequent steps.<br><br>You can pass `--` to indicate the end of the arguments for a given step, so the following args `-a -b -c -- -d` will pass the argument `-a -b -c` to the [Cloud Preparation Step](#cloud-preparation-step), and `-d` to the [Cloud Context Preparation Step](#cloud-context-preparation-step). You can use `--skip` to skip a given step (you shouldn't pass `--` in this case). For example, `--skip -c -d` will skip the [Cloud Preparation Step](#cloud-preparation-step) and pass `-c -d` to the [Cloud Context Preparation Step](#cloud-context-preparation-step). |
| <nobr>`--debug`</nobr> | Runs in verbose mode and forwards this option to the subsequent step. |

In this step, when the `dev` input var is `true`, the `path_params` value in the [Cloud Input Vars](#cloud-input-vars) file will be included in a new file at `<project_base_dir>/files/cloud/path-map.yml` so that the next steps can use it to map repositories to other locations and skip pulling already cloned repositories.

The value of `env_params` is written to the file `<project_base_dir>/files/cloud/env-params.yml` so that the next steps can use it to load the [`env_file`](#project-environment-file).

For each context in the project, 2 files with the same content in a different format will be created at `<project_base_dir>/files/cloud/ctxs/<ctx>/vars.yml` and `<project_base_dir>/files/cloud/ctxs/<ctx>/vars.sh` to be used in the [Cloud Context Preparation Step](#cloud-context-preparation-step) and [Cloud Context Main Step](#cloud-context-main-step). The contents of those files are defined in the [Cloud Context Input Vars](#cloud-context-input-vars) section.

This steps generate a file `<project_base_dir>/files/cloud/run-ctxs` to run each context passing as the first parameter the location of context directory (`<project_base_dir>/files/cloud/ctxs/<ctx>/`). Each context is run entirely ([Cloud Context Preparation Step](#cloud-context-preparation-step) and [Cloud Context Main Step](#cloud-context-main-step)) before starting the next context.

## Cloud Context Preparation Step